---
---

# Background and significance

I briefly describe the origins of gay neighborhoods, in order to elaborate on the possibilities of gentrification and assimilation introduced above. I discuss the existing evidence for change in gay neighborhoods, and assess the degree to which that evidence supports claims of assimilation or gentrification. I explain how the status of gay neighborhoods today is thought to differ from when they first formed, with particular attention to views about the contemporary meaning and impact of gay neighborhoods on LGBTQ lives. I position gay neighborhoods in relation to other urban neighborhoods and urban change more generally. Finally, I outline my intended contribution to this literature.

Minority neighborhoods contain not only residents of that group, but also group institutions and a visible local predominance of the group's culture [@wirth_ghetto_1928]. Accordingly, gay neighborhoods are urban places with concentrations of gay residents, gay institutions, and gay culture [@levine_gay_1979; @ghaziani_there_2014; @ghaziani_measuring_2014]. While not as long-established as Jewish and other immigrant neighborhoods [@wirth_ghetto_1928], they have existed in various American cities since at least the second half of the 20th century [@berube_my_2011; @demilio_capitalism_1992; @ghaziani_there_2014]. They arose to provide safety and visibility for LGBTQ people, and provided a defined space in which to build both a sense of community and political clout [@castells_cultural_1983; @armstrong_forging_2002; @hanhardt_safe_2013; @stewart-winter_queer_2016]. Gay neighborhoods have become a common feature of major cities, an urban type. In the 1970s, only three of the neighborhoods that @levine_gay_1979 investigates across five cities possessed all of the traits necessary to be gay neighborhoods in the sociological sense: the Castro in San Francisco, the West Village in New York, and West Hollywood in Los Angeles. Other neighborhoods, such as New Town in Chicago, possessed only some of these characteristics (people, institutions, culture, and isolation), and were accordingly perceived to be gay neighborhoods in varying degrees. By the 2000s, however, @ghaziani_there_2014 [2] can cite the existence of a dozen neighborhoods across as many cities. Known, visible gay neighborhoods have become established and have proliferated in the past several decades.

Gay neighborhoods are thought to originate in an initial wave of gentrification. For instance, before they were known as gay, the Castro was working-class Irish [@castells_cultural_1983, 156], while parts of Lakeview in Chicago were Puerto Rican [@enke_finding_2007, 73-77] and middle-class white [@stewart-winter_queer_2016, 106-109]. These existing residents were either replaced or displaced by gay newcomers. In this process, a typically working-class neighborhood, with affordable and run-down housing stock, is renovated and revitalized by this influx of LGBTQ people, often with only modest capital [@castells_cultural_1983; @lauria_toward_1985]. Though it has a basis in observed changes in neighborhoods like the Castro and Andersonville, this narrative draws on stereotyped traits to explain why LGBTQ people fix up and "spruce up" neighborhoods: lesbians are hardy urban pioneers, while gay men have artistic talent and valuable aesthetic tastes [@ghaziani_there_2014, 231-232; @castells_cultural_1983, 166]. Following Ruth Glass and naming this process *gentrification* emphasizes the potential for displacement or other harms to existing residents from this change in neighborhood economic status [@hanhardt_safe_2013, 128].

The "amenities" produced through this initial gentrification process make once-undesirable neighborhoods more generally attractive. As a consequence, gay neighborhoods may then decline as the result of a second wave of gentrification. @brown-saracino_explicating_2017 calls this process *advanced gentrification*, and notes that qualitative researchers have increasingly studied it even as quantitative research has neglected it. @collins_sexual_2004 fits advanced gentrification into a four-stage ecological model of gay neighborhood emergence in marginal areas, development, and integration, based on the case of Soho in London. Ultimately, an influx of heterosexuals may undermine the character or culture of the gay neighborhood, and lead to both the closure of local institutions and the dispersal of LGBTQ residents. It is not only that these residents can no longer afford to live in the gay neighborhood, but that the institutions that rendered it meaningfully gay no longer exist. In this model, gay neighborhoods and LGBTQ people play a specific intermediate role in urban change. They are both gentrifiers and subject to gentrification [@moskowitz_when_2017]. This stage model implies that different gay neighborhoods could exist simultaneously in different stages of "development," across cities or even within the same city. In fact, over long periods of time gay neighborhoods do move; "new" and "next" gay neighborhoods emerge in cities like Chicago and New York [@ghaziani_there_2014], though perhaps not everywhere [@ruting_economic_2008].

Rather than only responding to possibly heterogeneous local urban trends, gay neighborhoods may have become more generally "passé" [@brown_gay_2007] because of recent historical changes. In other words, increasing acceptance might lead to the spatial assimilation and cultural integration of LGBTQ people. Gay neighborhoods formed in response to stigma. But, since the formation of gay neighborhoods, LGBTQ people in the United States have won social and political victories. Legal achievements include the full decriminalization of homosexuality in 2003, and marriage equality in 2015. Socially, an unusually rapid shift in public opinion has taken place, with majorities now approving of homosexuality and same-sex marriage [@rosenfeld_moving_2017]. These national changes affect the urban places where LGBTQ people live. If one of the defining characteristics of "gay ghettos" was social isolation from mainstream American life [@levine_gay_1979], this isolation could now be coming to an end. For LGBTQ residents of gay neighborhoods, reduced stigma and increasing acceptance may remove the external social forces limiting their residential options. For straight urbanites, as disgust gives way to tolerance or progressiveness, the prospect of living in a gay neighborhood may come to seem attractive rather than outré. The net result of this shift would be a pattern of residential assimilation.

Assimilation and gentrification are not mutually exclusive. In fact, they could be mutually enabling. In terms of influx, gay neighborhoods attract straight residents enticed by urban amenities, some of which exist as a result of initial gay gentrification. But this can occur only if straight people are willing to move into gay neighborhoods. In terms of outflow, a gay neighborhood could simultaneously be losing poorer and more marginalized gay residents to urban gentrification, while also losing more affluent and more integrated gay residents to suburban assimilation. Provided that LGBTQ people are not being replaced by structurally equivalent straight people, these processes should be reflected in the economic and demographic profiles of these neighborhoods, in terms of incomes, rents, household types, and so on. By looking at these data, we can uncover possible evidence for recent, rapid change.

Evidence for change in gay neighborhoods is largely restricted to a handful of cities. Qualitative work documents changes in bar subcultures and street life in both San Francisco and New York [@mattson_style_2014; @hanhardt_safe_2013]. A recent *New York Times* article [@james_there_2017] reiterating the "there goes the gayborhood" trope rests primarily on two cases: a *Seattle Times* analysis of Capitol Hill [@balk_map:_2014] and Ghaziani's work on Boystown in Chicago. @ghaziani_there_2014 uses qualitative interviews to document directed LGBTQ migration in Chicago, from Boystown to Andersonville and other queer "cultural archipelagos." While confirming the existence of change, his principle finding does not provide evidence for the assimilation or disappearance of distinct queer urban spaces. In addition to interview data from Chicago, Ghaziani collects media accounts of gay neighborhood change from many cities in the United States. While these accounts establish widespread interest in and concern over change in gay neighborhoods, they do not demonstrate the existence or nature of this change.

The most compelling evidence that gay neighborhood change is widespread comes from two studies examining Atlanta and Dallas. Both are major cities in the South, and fall outside the cities that figure most prominently in journalism and research on gay neighborhood change. In Atlanta, @doan_demise_2011 analyze a combination of interviews, Census data, and planning documents. They find that, while LGBTQ people desire to live in gay neighborhoods like Midtown, they are increasingly unable to as gentrification affects the affordability of housing. As a result, the LGBT community has become dispersed to other neighborhoods. In Dallas, @smart_there_2016 examine change over time in the real estate listings advertised in a gay periodical. They find that these become increasingly dispersed over time, but largely in "hot spots" adjacent to existing enclaves. Nevertheless, they say, listings are still centered on the historic gay neighborhood of Oak Lawn. Though they note that homeowners expand more than renters. they take this as evidence of continued clustering rather than assimilation. The findings of these two studies each indicate some type of change, but point in somewhat different directions. Moreover, differences in method render these cases difficult to compare and synthesize. Finally, each of these works focuses on one or at most two cities. In fact, since @levine_gay_1979, no single researcher has examined even five cities concurrently.

By contrast to the narrowness of qualitative case studies, demographic evidence of assimilation is too broad. Studies of same-sex couples in urban areas do not examine gay neighborhoods specifically. At the metropolitan-area level, demographic research has shown a decline in segregation between same-sex and different-sex couples [@spring_declining_2013]. Unlike the present study, this research does not directly observe the demographics of gay neighborhoods. However, Spring argues that it indirectly implies assimilation in those neighborhoods. She examines 100 metropolitan areas, but she does not claim or demonstrate that all of those places contain gay neighborhoods. In fact, she notes that some cities with gay neighborhoods, like Chicago, are outliers, showing *increasing* segregation by sexuality for both male same-sex couples and female same-sex couples. In one of the only other studies of residential segregation by sexuality, @poston_residential_2017 also do not account for the role of gay neighborhoods in generating their hypotheses, nor do they distinguish between cities with and without gay neighborhoods in their analysis. This distinction is consequential: a concentration of LGBTQ residents does not automatically make a place into a gay neighborhood. Without "anchor institutions," even areas with large concentrations of LGBTQ residents are not perceived as gay neighborhoods [@ghaziani_there_2014; @ghaziani_measuring_2014]. These concentrations are invisible.

The continuing significance of gay neighborhoods is a motivation to care not just about outcomes for LGBTQ people, but for gay places themselves. Gay neighborhood change matters because gay neighborhoods remain meaningful to LGBTQ people and continue to materially impact their lives. Gay neighborhoods originated out of a need for "everyday survival" [@castells_cultural_1983] and safety from violence [@hanhardt_safe_2013], then enabled political organization and the formation of social movements [@armstrong_forging_2002]. They continue to play a role in providing a sense of community, facilitating cultural reproduction, and finding sexual and romantic partners. Through interviews and media content analysis, @ghaziani_there_2014 finds that LGBTQ residents of gay neighborhoods cite these reasons and more for choosing to live in them. And, whether they live in gay neighborhoods or not, LGBTQ people recognize that gay neighborhoods continue to be relevant. A national survey of LGBT Americans [@pew_research_center_survey_2013] shows that a majority (56%) agree that "it is important to maintain places like LGBT neighborhoods and gay and lesbian bars." The response indicates a divide among LGBTQ people over assimilation, with the remainder saying that "these types of places will not be important as LGBT people are more accepted into society." Gay men and those particularly invested in LGBT identity are the most likely to value gay neighborhoods, with two thirds of each naming them important. Finally, gay neighborhoods may hold particular importance for young queer and trans people of color, who are marginalized in multiple ways [@ghaziani_there_2014, 176-183]. Because of economic barriers, these individuals often already experience these neighborhoods as "vicarious citizens" [@greene_gay_2014] rather than as residents [@hanhardt_safe_2013]. Many LGBTQ people continue to perceive these spaces as a refuge, a mecca, or a home.

Gay neighborhoods and the changes they undergo attain broader significance for two reasons. First, they are linked to general urban processes. They ostensibly signal the attractiveness of a city to the "creative class" [@florida_cities_2005; @bereitschaft_neighborhood_2015]. Through commodification, they draw in tourists looking for authentic queer life [@oswin_researching_2005; @boyd_san_2011; @mattson_style_2014;  @orne_boystown:_2017]. Second, they are a distinct case of the more general class of minority enclaves. Considering gay neighborhoods is essential for disentangling the abstract operation of majority-minority dynamics from the specific histories of social structures like race, ethnicity, religion, and sexuality. Racial redlining and anti-sodomy laws, for instance, are obviously nonidentical in their effects, but ethnic and sexual identities are held to make similar contributions to the multiculturalism of the city [@reed_were_2003]. They raise similar questions about what the right to change the city means for the systematically disadvantaged [@harvey_right_2003], and what it is that members of minority groups want from their communities [@molotch_review_2015]. Carefully establishing the extent and nature of change in gay neighborhoods will lay an empirical foundation for future comparisons.

I have outlined my theoretical interest in assimilation and gentrification. Empirically, I proceed by measuring demographic change and economic change at the neighborhood level. This meso-level analysis bridges the gap between micro-level qualitative studies of single neighborhoods or cities and macro-level demographic analyses of all major metropolitan areas in the United States. Rather than focus on gay neighborhoods in isolation, I compare them to other neighborhoods in their local areas. By choosing the right scale and the right context for comparison, I contribute a novel degree of analytic leverage.

I achieve the breadth I need to draw robust conclusions in two ways. First, I include many more cities than prior work. I cover as many US cities as I can be sure have gay neighborhoods, and aim particularly to include those beyond the coasts and Chicago. Second, I consider more characteristics as outcomes. If we do not anticipate pure assimilation, it is important to consider broad profiles of demographic and economic change. If we think queer people of color stand to be particularly marginalized, I consider race through the proportion of white residents. Because gay neighborhoods have historically been the domain of gay men, I consider gender through the proportion male. If we suspect an influx of straight individuals, married-couple households provide a close proxy. If we anticipate advanced gentrification, changes in education levels, incomes, rents, and population density all provide clues. Widespread, consistent change on multiple of these measures would suggest assimilation (or gentrification) connected to increasing LGBTQ acceptance, particularly if the degree of change is distinct from non-gay neighborhoods. By contrast, variation and heterogeneity across gay neighborhoods, with gentrifying neighborhoods in gentrifying cities and unclear patterns elsewhere, would indicate that gay neighborhood change is fundamentally local. To adjudicate between these positions, I must systematically and comprehensively examine gay neighborhood change.
