---
---

# Data and methods

I proceed by identifying gay neighborhoods, selecting characteristics to examine, and modeling change over time comparatively. I identify gay neighborhoods consistently across a range of cities by using clusters of gay bars. I select seven Census tract features from the American Community Survey at two time points, spanning a ten-year period from 2006 to 2015, and use the values of those features at the earlier time period to match tracts within cities. I use linear models with appropriate controls to assess whether gay neighborhoods change differently from other neighborhoods over time.

## Gay neighborhoods from gay bars

To demarcate gay neighborhoods, I use clusters of gay bars, because concentrations of gay institutions are part of the definition of gay neighborhoods. For this definition, I rely on Levine, who writes that "an urban neighborhood can be termed a 'gay ghetto' if it contains gay institutions in number, a conspicuous and locally dominant gay subculture that is socially isolated from the larger community, and a residential population that is substantially gay" [-@levine_gay_1979]. I use one part of this definition as proxy for the whole in my operationalization. Similarly to Levine, @castells_cultural_1983 compare the locations of gay bars against four other indicators of gay neighborhoods: qualitative reports of gay residence, counts of multiple-male households, votes for a gay electoral candidate, and gay businesses. They find that these measures are generally consistent with each other. In terms of contemporary work, @mattson_style_2015 has documented the centrality of bars to gay cultural and neighborhood life, while @ghaziani_measuring_2014 has called them "anchor institutions" and proposed their use to measure urban sexual cultures. As opposed to other measures, gay bars have the advantage of being widespread and consistently measurable, which enables an analysis spanning multiple cities.

I obtain my list of gay bars from GayCities, a gay travel website. GayCities (www.gaycities.com) was founded in 2005. It relaunched in 2008, and has since grown into Q.Digital, an LGBTQ marketing and media conglomerate [@q.digital_q.digital_2015]. The site solicits crowdsourced opinions, reviews, and information from the LGBTQ community to provide a comprehensive picture of the places it lists. GayCities fulfills a similar role to traditional print gay travel guides and city guides. These guidebooks include the Gayellow Pages [@hayslett_out_2011] and the Damron's guides, which have a 50-year history and have been used in considerable previous research [@levine_gay_1979; @castells_city_1983, 148 Map 14.3; @mattson_counting_2017]. I choose GayCities over these print media source because, as an already-digital source, it is scalable and accessible. I can download bar listings for as many cities as are available, and easily extract the addresses of bars to geocode within Census tracts. For examining change in a recent time period, an internet-based data source has considerable advantages.

Because I am examining the present outcomes of past gay neighborhoods, my indicator of gay neighborhoods should be historical. To this end, I use an archived version of GayCities from 2007 to obtain bar listings, instead of the present version of the website. The Internet Archive, a non-profit organization, automatically crawls and archives the internet, which is useful to social scientists for historical research [@gade_.gov_2017]. I use their Wayback Machine tool, which provides snapshots of websites such as GayCities. The earliest relatively complete snapshot of GayCities is from July 28, 2007. I retrieve bar information from this archived version of GayCities through web scraping, the automated retrieval of unstructured data from the Internet [@boeing_new_2017]. Because GayCities' robots.txt is permissive of scraping and GayCities' terms prohibit only commercial use of their data, retrieving bar names and addresses in this way is justified.

In 2007, GayCities lists 902 bars across 63 cities. Of these, 840 bars are located in the US, with the remainder in Canada and Mexico. I exclude the six Canadian cities from consideration, and also choose to exclude nine locations that I classify as LGBTQ resort towns. These are places such as Provincetown and Fire Island. The remaining 48 US cities are candidates for my analysis. The number of bars per city ranges from 62 in New York City to 3 in Hartford, CT. (See Appendix A for a complete listing of cities.) Each GayCities web page also includes informative city-level and bar-level descriptions, which I inspect as context for my analyses.

I associate gay bars with Census tracts by geocoding their addresses, and aggregate adjacent tracts to form neighborhoods. I do this using two application programming interfaces for geocoding. I first send bar addresses from GayCities to the Google Maps Geocoding API, in order to obtain more precise addresses with zip codes. I manually adjudicate the 9 addresses for which Google Maps returns multiple results using GayCities bar descriptions. I batch code these refined addresses using the Census Geocoding API, a service that links addresses or coordinates to Census geographies. Finally, I geocode the 38 addresses for which the Census returns a tie or a failure to match an address through individual API calls, using the latitude and longitude provided by the Google Maps Geocoding API. In this way, I am able to successfully geocode all 840 bars within 488 Census tracts.

Many of these 488 tracts are adjacent to each other, indicating that gay bars frequently occur in spatially contiguous clusters of tracts. This is expected, because gay neighborhoods should contain concentrations of gay institutions. I merge these adjacent tracts in the final analysis for substantive and methodological reasons. Substantively, Census tracts do not correspond to neighborhoods, but urban demographers often lack principled ways of aggregating them. Spatial clusters of gay bars provide a rationale for aggregation. Methodologically, this *regionalization* process has the ancillary advantage of reducing the margin of error in ACS variable estimates, which can be substantial at the tract level [@spielman_reducing_2015]. I use the *sf* and *sp* packages for spatial data in R to generate lists of adjacent tracts, and I use the *igraph* package to assign numeric identifiers to the clusters produced by this adjacency list. In Appendix B, I show a network graph of these clusters, with the ones that I ultimately classify as gay neighborhoods highlighted. In this way, I move from gay bar locations to Census tracts to gay neighborhoods.

In connecting gay bars to gay neighborhoods, I am not concerned about selectivity in the GayCities listings. Any archival source is bound to be selective. But gay city guides have the appropriate incentives and the requisite cultural knowledge to document concentrations of gay institutions, gay culture, and gay people. Gay neighborhoods must be visibly gay; a neighborhood that was not known as gay could not have been subject to processes of assimilation and gentrification affecting gay neighborhoods specifically. Finally, while individual bars may open and close, clusters of bars do not spring up overnight.

In each city that I choose to include, I designate the largest cluster or clusters of gay bars as gay neighborhoods. Because they are large cities that have played outsized roles in LGBTQ urban history, I include the two largest neighborhoods in San Francisco and Chicago, and three in New York [@mattson_style_2015; @hanhardt_safe_2013; @ghaziani_there_2014]. I rank the other cities based on the size of their largest cluster, and determine 21 to have gay neighborhoods, though I subsequently treat Long Beach, California, as if it were part of Los Angeles because they are both within the same county. I include some more peripheral cities based on their occurrence in prior research, such as New Orleans [@knopp_theoretical_1990], Columbus [@hayslett_out_2011], and San Antonio [@stone_where_2017]. In total, this gives me 28 gay neighborhoods. I combine neighborhood labels and descriptions from the GayCities data with information from the literature to assign descriptive names to each of them, which I list in Appendix A.

I exclude the other half of the 48 available cities in the GayCities data from my analyses entirely, because I cannot be sure that they have gay neighborhoods at all. The largest city excluded in this way is Phoenix, Arizona. I examine the spatial distribution of bars in all cities visually, and use city descriptions from GayCities, prior qualitative research, and media accounts as supplemental information in making these choices. For instance, the GayCities description for Seattle notes that "Gay Seattle is primarily centered around Capitol Hill, a quaint, friendly neighborhood..." By contrast, the description of Portland, OR, begins by stating that "Although it has no gay district, Portland makes up for that with all that it does have to offer." On the basis of these descriptions, and on media coverage and research [@atkins_gay_2011; @balk_map:_2014; @albright_there_2018], I include Seattle and its Capitol Hill neighborhood in my analysis, but exclude Portland.

Not all clusters of gay bars are gay neighborhoods, so I use other aspects of Levine's definition to refine the filtering of my neighborhoods. Because gay neighborhoods should contain gay residential concentrations as well as institutions, I filter out warehouse districts in cities like Portland, Austin, and Minneapolis. Because gay neighborhoods are areas where LGBTQ people exert cultural dominance or "set the tone" [@ghaziani_there_2014; @chauncey_gay_1994], I exclude downtown or center city areas, under the assumption that LGBTQ people are not dominant in these areas. This means that I filter out bars with a "downtown" neighborhood label in cities like Columbus and Seattle, even when those bars are adjacent to gay neighborhoods. I rerun the clustering process described above with these restrictions.

This bar-based approach to gay neighborhoods has several implications that shape the scope of my findings. First, even though I include a broader range of cities and neighborhoods than prior work, my approach centers core gay spaces over peripheral ones. In that regard, it differs from approaches focused on queering space [@brown_queering_2008; @oswin_critical_2008; @halberstam_queer_2005], though some gay bar cultures are queer rather than homonormative [@mattson_style_2015; @kanai_remaking_2015]. I categorically exclude non-urban gay spaces, such as Provincetown, from my study. Qualitative work has examined rural queer spaces in comparison with urban ones [@halberstam_queer_2005; @brown-saracino_neighborhood_2010; @brown-saracino_explicating_2017], but I do not expect them to be quantitatively comparable. By contrast to rural resort towns, I do not categorically exclude lesbian women from consideration---unlike @castells_cultural_1983 or @levine_gay_1979. While more gay men than lesbian women live or have lived in gay neighborhoods---32% versus 18%---both groups are present [@pew_research_center_survey_2013]. Accordingly, most of the bars used to determine neighborhood locations and boundaries are bars for gay men, but lesbian bars such as the Lexington in San Francisco and the Wildrose in Seattle also form part of my bar listings. I expect and find an empirical bias toward men in my demographic data.

## Measuring neighborhood change

I select seven demographic and economic variables from the US Census Bureau's American Community Survey, and use these to examine neighborhood change between two points over a ten-year period, from 2006 to 2015. The ACS has been conducted on a yearly basis since 2006, and the estimates are publicly available in 1-year, 3-year, and 5-year data sets. I use two non-overlapping 5-year ACS data sets, because tract-level data are only available at this temporal resolution. The 2006-2010 values of each variable are my covariates, and the 2011-2015 values are the outcomes. Based on the neighborhood classification described above, I create a binary indicator for whether or not a tract is part of a gay neighborhood. I retrieve ACS data for all tracts in all counties containing gay bars, using
the *tidycensus* R package [@walker_tidycensus:_2018]. These data are the components of the models I describe in the following section.

The ACS has advantages and disadvantages. It is regular, recent, and frequent, and so better suited for examining short-term changes than the decennial Census. However, the fact that five years of data are combined into a single estimate could obscure temporal trends. Moreover, as a survey rather than a complete census, the ACS has relatively large margins of error in its estimates [@spielman_studying_2015]. This problem of precision is particularly acute for small areas like Census tracts, and for small counts and proportions within those areas. In choosing among related variables, I select the variables that best mitigate these shortcomings.

The neighborhood changes of interest are both demographic and economic. In terms of demographic characteristics, I evaluate changes in the gender ratio using the proportion of male individuals, and changes in racial composition using the proportion of non-Hispanic white individuals. For education levels, I use the proportion of individuals with a college education or higher. My proxy for sexuality is changes in household type, measured by the proportion of married-couple households. In Census data, this refers only to different-sex married couples. I do not use the proportion of same-sex couple households as a measure, for two reasons. First, because this proportion is always small, even in gay neighborhoods, it has a large margin of error relative to its value. Second, counts of same-sex couples are systematically inflated due to small random errors in different-sex couples in recording their genders. Because the Census Bureau improved its form design to mitigate this problem between 2007 and 2008, the 2006-2010 counts are not comparable to the 2011-2015 counts [@oconnell_same-sex_2011]. I cannot examine neighborhood changes in the proportion of same-sex couples over time. My other measures are sufficient to characterize demographic change in gay neighborhoods.

In addition to these four proportions, I select three other variables. I select two variables as economic indicators, median household income and median rent. While previous researchers have critiqued the ACS median rent measure as somewhat unreliable [@mccabe_does_2016], I prefer it over alternate housing-related measures, such as proportion of owner-occupied housing, largely because I anticipate gay neighborhoods to have a high proportion of renters. Where I present numbers, I have converted the 2010 values to 2015 dollars, using the conversion factor recommended by the Census for comparison. When I combine tracts, I take a population-weighted average of medians. Finally, I select population density to account for population dynamics more generally. Densification is a potential aspect of neighborhood change, and gay neighborhoods are generally found in dense urban areas to begin with. Population densities are taken from data prepared by Social Explorer [@u.s._census_bureau_population_2010; @u.s._census_bureau_population_2015].

To summarize, the seven outcomes are proportions college-educated, male, married, and white; median income and median rent; and population density. With these, I aim to capture information about the types of people anticipated to already live in gay neighborhoods, such as middle-class, white, gay men; the types of people predicted to move into these neighborhoods, such as straight, married couples; and the kinds of changes associated with gentrification more broadly, such as an influx of middle or upper class residents and a rise in rents. I have chosen variables that are both substantively informative and reliable.

## Modeling change over time

My overarching question is whether gay neighborhoods show patterns of change like each other, because they are gay neighborhoods, or whether they are instead more similar to other neighborhoods in their respective cities. Put another way, does the fact that these are specifically *gay* neighborhoods matter for the kinds of contextual changes they experience? For each of the seven outcomes above, I use a linear model where the predictors are whether or not an area is a gay neighborhood, the value of the outcome at the 2006-2010 time point, and the values of all of the other variables at the 2006-2010 time point. The units of observation are either individual tracts or aggregates of tracts into neighborhoods. These models take the following general form:

$$x_{t+1} \sim \mathcal{N}(\alpha + \beta_1 gay_{t} + \beta_2 x_{t} + X\beta_{controls}, \sigma^2)$$

For example, the proportion of college-educated individuals in a neighborhood in 2011-2015 would be modeled as depending on whether or not that neighborhood was gay, the proportion college-educated in 2006-2010, and a set of 2006-2010 characteristics as controls.

To answer the empirical question my models are oriented toward addressing, I must incorporate the structure of my data and select appropriate subsets of it for comparison. That is, I must account for systematic differences across cities, and choose non-gay areas that make for appropriate comparison units to the 28 gay neighborhoods. I adopt two separate strategies to address these issues. First, because the Census tracts in my data are grouped within 23 different cities, a multilevel modeling strategy is appropriate [@mcelreath_statistical_2016]. These varying-intercept models take the form:

$$x_{t+1} \sim \mathcal{N}(\alpha_{city} + \beta_1 gay_{t} + \beta_2 x_{t} + X\beta_{controls}, \sigma^2)$$
$$\alpha_{city} \sim \mathcal{N}(\alpha, \sigma_\alpha^2)$$

The between-city variation modeled in this way can be compared to the variation between gay and other neighborhoods, and modeling it accounts for the impact of factors local to particular urban areas.

Second, rather than using all tracts from the same counties as the gay-neighborhood tracts, I can restrict my comparison to tracts that appeared similar in 2006-2010, but were not part of gay neighborhoods. I match each tract in every gay neighborhood to another tract in the same city that is similar on all seven covariates in 2006-2010. Unlike the gay neighborhood tracts, these matched tracts are not contiguous to each other; they form a synthetic neighborhood rather than an actual one. I include total population as an eighth matching characteristic to ensure that the aggregates of tracts are also comparable to each other. I use nearest-neighbor matching based on Mahalanobis distance and the *MatchIt* R package [@ho_matchit:_2011]. Because my "treatment" does not occur at a sharply-defined point in time, my goal is not to approximate causal inference [@ho_matching_2007; @stuart_matching_2010], only to ensure a reasonable comparison. Models on the matched data can be fit at the tract level or at the neighborhood level, where neighborhoods are contiguous or synthetic groups of tracts. I present both approaches, but take the latter to be more substantively meaningful.

I compare models fit on this subset of matched observations to models fit on all tracts. By focusing on comparison with a subset of neighborhoods that are generally similar, I improve my ability to make claims about whether or not the cultural and institutional gayness of these neighborhoods is an important factor for change. Ultimately, because combining multilevel modeling and matching strategies into a single model does not improve model fit for any of the outcomes of interest, I analyze and present the results of these two approaches separately.

The small number of gay neighborhood tracts limits the statistical power of my models and the potential model complexity. More complex models might allow for correlations among outcomes [@zellner_direct_2010], or incorporate ACS measurement error in a Bayesian framework [@mcelreath_statistical_2016], but I leave these innovations for future work.
