---
title: meeting with Kate
date: 2018-05-29
---

I start with change too soon. start with the existence of residential concentration of stigmatized group. what does it mean to have residential concentration of stigmatized communities?

ASSERT generality; stop looking for examples of it. It can be just me and the Chicago School; that's fine. just declare that this is a case of something, and there are other cases which we

this provides the CONTEXT for people to care about the problem. describe what was there to start with. have an abstract discussion of what these neighborhoods were, how they were like and different from other neighborhoods.

highlight the dimensions on which they were/are similar -- again, residential segregation of stigmatized group. of course they're not identical! abstract: on these dimensions, this is a case of this social phenomenon. -> expect a different trajectory of change over time and, want to document what seems to be happening.


[is Schelling the most abstract here?]

what are the key abstract dimensions? Go back to Wirth and the ghetto - Levine.

be more precise about empirical patterns; "assimilation" has multiple meanings.

be careful: married may be a good proxy for gay, but male isn't (just happened to have tended male, because of divisions between and differences between gay men and lesbians)

now, let's look at the nature of change, through sex ratio, economics, etc. be neutral. do we see evidence of ... ? (in DISCUSSION)

be more "gentle" in intro with terms, focus more on **logic**

per Kate, an influx does not necessarily imply assimilation; it might be more about gentrification

my articulation: "push" force keeping gays in; repulsive force keeping straights out. acceptance should lessen these, and potentially lead to assimilation.

assimilation implies integration of gay people into the rest of society. influx could indicate exploitation (gentrification) rather than assimilation.

make assertions, but also be really concrete about what I'm describing. [this is a trick I haven't figured out yet.]

acceptance and destigmatization; preconditions to assimilation

acceptance is NOT assimilation. the macro-level change I'm talking about is acceptance. which MAY LEAD to residential and cultural assimilation at the metro and neighborhood level.

in discussion: acceptance is best for the most CONVENTIONAL gay people. most available to middle class, white...

not for those who are queer, poor, POC, trans, etc.; but the most advantaged had been the economic backbone of the community.

it's NOT CLEAR who's left and who's leaving: do the most advantaged remain? or just young professional gays?
acceptance potentially has consequences: comparison to other neighborhoods lets us see this.

urban areas: housing stock, amenities: boutiques, art galleries, brunch spots...

what about the 20-30 year trend toward the revitalization of urban cores? what if these are now spots for unmarried young professionals in general (PREFIGURE this problem in intro; this is why looking at multiple indicators, including economic ones, is important.)

again, this makes economic HETEROGENEITY an important indicator; my indicators are demographic and economic, not

a neighborhood that doesn't have ALL the traits of a ghetto may still be a gay neighborhood in some form, just not in the ideal/past form. Chicago School.

Oakland, Boystown are Ghaziani's examples (what happens when residential concentration and institutional concentration are separate) -> we can start to rethink the gayborhood (BUT ONLY IF WE KNOW WHAT'S ACTUALLY HAPPENING)

does the formation of these places necessitate exclusion? what happens given less exclusion? affinity, hyperdependence [as if independent communities are bad]

certain moments in history where gay neighborhoods happen - maybe the conditions aren't there any more, but the result wouldn't necessarily be complete disintegration [and the only way to know is to LOOK]
