---
---

# Abstract

This paper begins to address whether it is the unique characteristics of gay neighborhoods that lead them to undergo change across the board, or whether only some of them are coincidentally impacted by broader urban processes. These explanations carry different implications about the nature of the problem facing LGBTQ people and other marginalized groups looking to understand change in their community spaces. I investigate neighborhood-level economic and demographic changes, which have previously been theorized as linked to known cultural and institutional changes in gay neighborhoods. I make comparisons to other neighborhoods and to citywide contexts. To construct gay neighborhoods for which broad profiles of change can be examined, the paper links a novel digital data source of gay bar listings from the mid-2000s to American Community Survey data. I take a broad and systematic cross-city approach to a phenomenon that has previously been studied deeply and narrowly. I find mixed results, wherein gay neighborhoods undergo distinct increases in education and income levels indicative of advanced gentrification. However, considering gender and household type fails to show an increased prevalence of different-sex couples, which runs counter to the idea that these neighborhoods are becoming systematically less gay. In terms of changes in rent and density, gay neighborhoods do not appear to differ from other urban neighborhoods. From this combination of distinctness and sameness, I conclude that while concerns about gentrification are somewhat justified, gay neighborhood change is not primarily due to processes of influx and assimilation that are particular to LGBTQ people and their changing social position in US cities.
