---
---

# Introduction

Are gay neighborhoods changing because they are gay---that is, because of their association with LGBTQ people, institutions, and culture? Or do they change only because they are sometimes subject to broader urban processes of gentrification? The oft-repeated notion that "there goes the gayborhood" [@brown_gender_2014; @ghaziani_there_2014; @smart_there_2016] implies the former. The relevance of these spaces has changed, with them becoming less important to LGBTQ people and more interesting or more accessible to straight people, and this results in changes to both institutional and residential dynamics, rendering gay neighborhoods less gay and otherwise transformed. From the point of view of the LGBTQ community, these changes are generally implied or presumed to be for the worse.

If what we might think of as the success of LGBTQ movements, in terms of legal equality and public opinion change, results in the undermining of gay spaces [@ghaziani_there_2014], that is an intriguing social paradox with broader implications. The other possibility, that the story is not about us, has different implications for LGBTQ people and socially marginalized groups more generally. Each explanation suggests different underlying problems with different potential solutions. Perhaps we should be talking less about the consequences of mobile gay dating apps for gay spaces [@greenhalgh_grindr_2017], and more about neoliberalism [@hanhardt_safe_2013] and the right to the city [@harvey_right_2003].

So, *are these neighborhoods victims of their own success, or of urban processes beyond the control of a sexual and social minority?*

The "there goes the gayborhood" narrative of gay neighborhood change is this: In the United States, there has been a societal shift toward acceptance in straight perceptions of LGBTQ people [@rosenfeld_moving_2017]. This has led to changes in gay neighborhood demographics. Straight people are moving in. LGBTQ people are moving out. And, therefore, these neighborhoods are losing their gay institutions and their cultural vitality as centers of gay life. Changes in culture or everyday life are linked to changes in residential or economic patterns. If gay neighborhoods are indeed changing, those changes should be reflected not just in bar closures or bachelorette parties, but in numbers as well.

It is not possible to measure these flows of people directly. Instead, what is known about neighborhood change and gentrification as general phenomena can provide a way forward. My basic insight is that we can better characterize gay neighborhood change by considering factors beyond sexuality. In other words, if gay neighborhoods are undergoing pronounced changes, it is unlikely that they are only "de-gaying" [@ghaziani_there_2014]. Instead, neighborhood change is expected to involve broader linked demographic and economic shifts, in terms of class, race, and so on.

Different patterns of change can be used to distinguish between possible explanations for why gay neighborhoods are changing. If gay neighborhoods are undergoing assimilation due to a society-wide shift in attitudes toward LGBTQ people, gay neighborhoods should look similar to each other in terms of how they are changing, across cities and contexts. They should differ from neighborhoods in their same city. By contrast, if broader urban processes of gentrification are the driver of gay neighborhood change, this should affect gay neighborhoods in some cities, but not others. In this latter case, gay neighborhoods should look similar to other neighborhoods in their same city in terms of how they change, and less like other gay neighborhoods in different places. A final possibility is that gay neighborhoods do differ systematically from other neighborhoods in how they change over time, but in ways that run counter to expectations of assimilation.

To address my initial question by providing evidence for these different possibilities, I proceed in several steps. First, I identify a set of gay neighborhoods across a broad range of US cities for inclusion in this study. Second, I characterize how they are changing descriptively, in relation to each other and to their urban contexts. Finally, I model differences between gay and other neighborhoods across a variety of outcomes. To accomplish this, I combine novel data on gay institutions with systematic American Community Survey about gay neighborhoods.
