---
---

# Background

## Gay neighborhoods

How can gay neighborhoods be defined, analytically and practically? Here I outline the terminology and definitions I will use. For consistency, I use the term "gay neighborhood" throughout to refer to the object of my study. The academic terminology for these places is heterogeneous and has evolved over time; see @brown_gender_2014 for an extensive summary.[^whygay] I ground my conceptualization and operationalization of gay neighborhoods in two foundational sociological studies of gay urban space.

[^whygay]: In keeping with the literature, I use "gay" over more current alternatives like "queer" or "LGBTQ," but I do not mean it to be deterministic. However, it is not justified to assume that these spaces are radical ("queer") or inclusive ("LGBTQ"). In fact, some have instead been called "homonormative" [@hanhardt_safe_2013; @mattson_style_2014; @kanai_remaking_2015].

Drawing on the urban sociology of the Chicago school, @levine_gay_1979 [364] uses four criteria to define and identify a gay neighborhood: gay institutions, gay culture, gay residents, and a level of social isolation. The multifaceted nature of this definition is important, because it allows for gradations wherein some neighborhoods are more prototypically or clearly gay neighborhoods than others, because they satisfy more of the criteria or fulfill them more strongly. This is what Levine finds in his examination of five cities.

Like Levine, @castells_cultural_1983 use multiple criteria in their classic study of gay territoriality in San Francisco. They compare qualitative reports of gay residence, quantitative measures of multiple-male households, votes for a gay electoral candidate, gay businesses, and gay bars. These residential, institutional, and cultural criteria largely correspond to those articulated by Levine. Importantly, they find that these measures are generally consistent with each other. This raises the possibility of using one aspect of a gay neighborhood as a proxy for the whole.

While the most widely recognized or iconic gay neighborhoods are places like the Castro in San Francisco or Greenwich Village in New York, these prototypical places are not necessarily representative of the social category of gay neighborhoods more broadly [@bowker_sorting_2000]. Still, less culturally prominent neighborhoods like Capitol Hill in Seattle or Midtown in Atlanta can be recognized to have something in common with them. In this study I aim to consider as broad a range of gay neighborhoods as possible.

The dichotomization of neighborhoods into those marked as gay and those that are not is a case of a classification and boundary definition problem [@bowker_sorting_2000]. These problems are common in research on social objects. In this study, the problem of categorization recurs at multiple levels. A city could have a recognizable gay neighborhood, or it could not have one. A neighborhood's boundaries could be sharp, or they could be fuzzy; they could be official, or informal; universally accepted, or contested. Creating these categories and boundaries is a methodological requirement of this project. Because this is a complex problem, I provide only an approximate solution with ample room for refinement in future work. I use the boundaries I draw pragmatically, I do not claim that they are definitive, nor that they are exactly the ones inhabitants would draw in practice.

## Gay bars as neighborhood institutions

In this work, I use one criterion---the locations of gay bars---as my primary indicator for gay neighborhoods. Gay bars are widespread and their locations are consistently measurable, enabling an analysis across multiple cities. By contrast, it is not feasible to perform ethnographic observations in two dozen cities, and not all cities have gay electoral candidates or gay business associations. I will revisit the other criteria provided by Levine and by Castells and Murphy for interpretive disambiguation and qualitative case selection.

This paper focuses on outcomes for gay neighborhoods, using gay bars only as a proxy. But the association between gay bars and gay neighborhoods is strong. Gay bars are what @ghaziani_measuring_2014 calls "anchor institutions." He proposes that these anchor institutions be used to measure the ties of urban sexual cultures to particular places. Further demonstrating the strength of this association in the popular and academic imagination, Pew, in a 2013 representative survey of LGBT Americans, asks about the the continuing importance of gay neighborhoods and gay bars in a combined question [@pew_research_center_survey_2013]. They ask whether "it is important to maintain places like LGBT neighborhoods and gay and lesbian bars," and a majority of their respondents (56%) agree.[^disagree]

[^disagree]: The converse statement is that "these types of places will not be important as LGBT people are
more accepted into society." 68% of gay men, 55% of lesbians, and 47% of bisexuals say that these places are important to maintain [@pew_research_center_survey_2013].

The choice to focus on gay neighborhoods and gay bars has a number of consequences that I briefly clarify. First, it differs from approaches focused on queering space [@brown_queering_2008; @oswin_critical_2008]. Instead, this project deliberately concentrates on core or central gay spaces rather than the periphery [@halberstam_queer_2005]. At the same time, gay bar cultures and styles can be heterogeneous [@mattson_style_2014], so using them as a proxy should uncover a range of gay neighborhoods. However, gay institutions do not represent LGBTQ people uniformly. Most notably, they are biased toward gay men over lesbian women.[^lesbian_bars] While I show empirically that the neighborhoods I study skew male, I depart from @levine_gay_1979 and @castells_cultural_1983 by not a priori restricting the domain of my research to gay men.[^wholives] I translate the biases documented from ethnographic and historical work [@hanhardt_safe_2013; @mattson_style_2014; among others] into empirical expectations: if the archetypical gay neighborhood is, or was, a space for middle-class, white gay men, that should be reflected in the demographic attributes I can measure.

[^lesbian_bars]: My bar data confirm this. They are, on the whole, biased toward bars for gay men. However, queer women's bars, like the Wildrose in Seattle or the Lexington in San Francisco, do appear in the data, and I include them in the construction of gay neighborhoods. On lesbian bars and queer women's spaces more generally see @podmore_gone_2006 and @enke_finding_2007, among others.

[^wholives]: According to @pew_research_center_survey_2013, 32% of gay men and 18% of lesbians say that they have ever lived in an LGBT neighborhood. Conversely, however, 29% of bisexual women and 17% of bisexual men say that they ever have.

## Change in gay neighborhoods

This work charts a course between different ways of conceptualizing how urban change affects LGBTQ people and gay neighborhoods, in terms of gentrification and changes in residential segregation. These conceptual models loosely align with different scales (micro and macro) and methods (qualitative and quantitative) for examining change.

*Gentrification* is a particular kind of neighborhood change, with contested definitions and a significant debate over its prevalence and impact [@brown-saracino_explicating_2017]. Loosely, a gentrifying neighborhood increases in terms of socioeconomic status measured by income and education, and displacement of marginalized residents results. Gentrification has been strongly tied to qualitative discussions of gay neighborhood change from the 1980s to the present [@castells_city_1983; @lauria_toward_1985; @knopp_theoretical_1990; @collins_sexual_2004; @ruting_economic_2008; @hanhardt_safe_2013; @mattson_style_2014; @kanai_remaking_2015]. In particular, the four-stage model of gay neighborhood development and decline articulated by @collins_sexual_2004, beginning with an influx of gay institutions and people into a "declining" area and ending with integration and emigration, provides an implicit theoretical backdrop for any work in this area, including mine. I cannot test how generalizable that proposed theoretical process is; my data are not detailed or temporally extensive enough to distinguish different stages of gentrification. Instead, this work empirically establishes the range of changes than can be seen---or not seen---in gay neighborhoods, and how distinct those changes are. Ultimately, some, but not all, of the evidence I find is consistent with gentrification across many gay neighborhoods, beyond the change occurring in similar neighborhoods.

A different framing of urban change, more common in demographic approaches, is *residential segregation*. Two important quantitative studies, @spring_declining_2013 and @poston_residential_2017, have examined the existence of and change in residential segregation between different-sex and same-sex couples using Census data. Though it is conceptually and logically related, residential segregation at the city or metropolitan-area level does not measure the same thing as neighborhood change. Though her work is adopted by @ghaziani_there_2014 and others, @spring_declining_2013 in particular explicitly states that her work is not meant to draw inferences about neighborhoods. I depart from this demographic approach to look at neighborhoods directly. My analysis, instead of looking at the fates of gay and lesbian *populations*, examines what has happened in gay *spaces*.

In this way, the works that have the most in common with I attempt here are @doan_demise_2011, @hayslett_out_2011, and @smart_there_2016. They find, respectively, gentrification and dispersal of LGBTQ people in Atlanta, geographic clustering of same-sex couples in Columbus, and a combination of diffusion and continued clustering through gay and lesbian real estate listing in Dallas. I share their concern with expanding the study of gay neighborhoods outside the core of the gay urban imaginary, moving beyond a narrow focus on cities like New York, San Francisco, and Chicago. However, I trade their detailed quantitative analyses of single cities for breadth of comparison.

This project is not a macro-level analysis of urban change or segregation, nor a micro-level examination of processes or narratives of gentrification in individual gay neighborhoods. Instead, I undertake a meso-level investigation, a small-N study incorporating nearly 30 gay neighborhoods from two dozen cities. Using gay bars and Census data, I combine a qualitative approach to the incorporation of prior empirical and theoretical knowledge with quantitative techniques of analysis.

To recapitulate, I aim to adjudicate between competing explanations for gay neighborhood change, using the different patterns of demographic and economic change that they imply. These theories carry distinct implications for the role of LGBTQ people and other socially marginalized communities in navigating their own fates. Directly inspired by questions opened up by @ghaziani_there_2014 and others about why gay neighborhoods are changing, I address the need for more empirical research about the nature of gay neighborhood change [@brown_gender_2014]. Further, I contribute a response to calls to broaden the way gay urban geographies are studied within sociology [@stone_where_2017].
