---
---

# Discussion and conclusion

To conclude, I return to the contending interpretations and implications I laid out in the beginning. In one view, if whether or not a neighborhood was marked as gay in the past turns out to matter a great deal for what that neighborhood winds up looking like in the present, this implies that change in gay neighborhoods really does have to do with the changing social position of LGBTQ people in American society, and the corresponding social position of gay neighborhoods in US cities. Conversely, if whether or not a neighborhood is marked as gay is not so predictive of how it changes, then the urban processes operating are more likely to be the same, differing only in terms of symbolic impact: LGBTQ people care about outcomes in these particular neighborhoods because their communities are impacted.

Which of these interpretations is best supported? The evidence I have found falls between them. In the gay neighborhoods I have studied, educational levels and some economic conditions are changing in common. These changes resemble the gentrification ultimately associated with gay neighborhood decline [@collins_sexual_2004]. Paradoxically, however, this decline itself is not evidenced by current demographic data. Finally, in some ways, gay neighborhoods are not coherently different from other neighborhoods.

Given this evidence of gentrification, I cannot completely dismiss the concerns raised by those who claim gay neighborhoods are changing. However, the demographic changes that would suggest that these neighborhoods are "de-gaying" are not apparent everywhere. I would therefore caution against ascribing too much unity or coherence to the category of gay neighborhood, and advocate for a greater attention to how their trajectories may diverge from each other.

I have tested for the existence of particular patterns of demographic change. Given prior evidence, I did not assess cultural or institutional change directly, but it is unlikely that cultural and demographic changes are orthogonal to or decoupled from each other. At a basic level, gay neighborhoods generally cohere as a sociological and cultural object, and this coherence is visible quantitatively. As @bachrach_culture_2014 articulates, researchers taking demographic approaches stand to miss out if they do not account for cultural patterns.

Looking at outcomes for neighborhoods delineated by sexuality adds to a sociological understanding of urban neighborhood change. Gay neighborhoods have unique processes of community formation and potentially distinct processes of institutional maintenance. Nonetheless, observing how they change and remain resilient to change carries implications for other social groups. It might be, for example, that heterogeneity among LGBTQ people leads to the combination of resilience and susceptibility to change seen in gay neighborhoods. Some LGBTQ people, for reasons of wealth or education, might benefit from or avoid the harms of changes in gay neighborhoods.  In gay neighborhoods where income and education levels are increasing, residents who are poorer, less educated, or otherwise disadvantaged would remain vulnerable.

My findings affirm the qualitative critique of using quantitative thresholds to determine whether a given neighborhood is potentially susceptible to gentrification [@brown-saracino_explicating_2017]. Gay neighborhoods are whiter and wealthier initially than the medians for their cities, and thus generally fit with what Brown-Saracino describes as "advanced gentrification." Finally, this work begins to push the quantitative study of neighborhood change beyond consideration of class and race to consider outcomes in terms of other factors like gender and household composition.

This study has limitations, some of which may be addressed by future work. The data collected by the Census Bureau render certain types of people visible or invisible, with consequences for studying the displacement of LGBTQ people by straight people. Using this study's data and methods, the young, single, male tech-worker "bro" in Seattle [@romano_cultures_2015] presents a greater challenge for detection than the straight couple with a stroller in Chicago [@ghaziani_there_2014]. Moreover, reliance on the American Community Survey creates challenges in terms of timespan and measurement error. A valuable extension of this work would be to use the alternative data source of the decennial Census to add robustness and temporal depth to these findings. In some cities, gay neighborhood change might be a longstanding phenomenon; in others it might be more novel. In the terms of @collins_sexual_2004, different gay neighborhoods might be in different stages of development and decline. This possibility, however, would still run counter to the hypothesis that the disappearance of traditional gay neighborhoods is recent and universal.

This paper has reached its conclusions by innovating in a number of ways. I have combined a generative idea from one line of thinking with an analytic strategy from another. Using novel web data, I have drawn on LGBTQ community knowledge of gay institutions, and combined this with the systematic strengths of demographic data from the Census Bureau. Compared with previous scholars examining gay neighborhoods, I have taken a broader, systematic view, across a greater range of cities and neighborhoods. As as result, I have been able to both confirm and challenge some of the findings of this literature. Compared with demographic analyses of residential segregation and same-sex couples, I have refocused analysis on outcomes in gay spaces instead of outcomes for LGBTQ people. Patterns of change in gay neighborhoods shape the context of LGBTQ residential decisions and outcomes, so investigating the former potentially adds to our understanding of the latter.

While bridging bodies of work creates challenges in terms of audience, this effort opens up a new area for inquiry in the study of gay spaces and communities. Methodologically, it starts to fill in the gap between conducting a hundred interviews in a single city [@ghaziani_there_2014] and examining metropolitan-level change in a hundred MSAs [@spring_declining_2013]. In closing, I would argue both that this creative, mixed approach has applications across a range of social objects, and that gay neighborhoods as a sociological object merit further study across a multiplicity of methods.
